[Polkadot Wiki Migration] How to Validate (Polkadot) (#45)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: infrastructure/running-a-validator/onboarding-and-offboarding/set-up-validator.md

    ``` bash
    polkadot key generate-node-key --file INSERT_PATH_TO_NODE_KEY
    ```

- **Use Default Path** - you can also generate the node key with the following command, which will automatically save the key to the base path of your node:

    ``` bash
    polkadot key generate-node-key --default-base-path
    ```

    Save the file path for reference. You will need it in the next step to configure your node with a static identity.

### Set the Node Key

After generating the node key, configure your node to use it by specifying the path to the key file when launching your node. Add the following flag to your validator node's startup command:

``` bash
polkadot --node-key-file INSERT_PATH_TO_NODE_KEY
```

Following these steps ensures that your node retains its identity, making it discoverable by peers without the risk of conflicting identities across sessions. For further technical background, see Polkadot SDK [Pull Request #3852](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/pull/3852){target=\_blank} for the rationale behind requiring static keys.

> ## Validate

Reviewer: I reordered the sections. See if it makes more sense now :-)

### Verify Sync via Telemetry

To confirm that your validator is live and synchronized with the Polkadot network, visit the [Telemetry](https://telemetry.polkadot.io/#list/Polkadot%20CC1){target=\_blank} page. Telemetry provides real-time information on node performance and can help you check if your validator is connected properly. Search for your node by name. You can search all nodes currently active on the network, which is why you should use a unique name for easy recognition. Now, confirm that your node is fully synced by comparing the block height of your node with the network's latest block.

In the following example, a node named `techedtest` is successfully located and synchronized, ensuring it's prepared to participate in the network:

![polkadot-dashboard-telemetry](/images/infrastructure/running-a-validator/onboarding-and-offboarding/set-up-validator/polkadot-dashboard-telemetry.webp)

### Activate via Validator Tab

Follow these steps to use the Polkadot.js Apps UI to activate your validator:

> 1. Go to the **Validator** tab in the Polkadot.js Apps UI and locate the section where you input the keys generated from `rotateKeys`. Paste the output from `author_rotateKeys`, which is a hex-encoded key that links your validator with its session keys:

Reviewer: I wish I knew! I didn't get any other instructions or a screenshot. Maybe @0xLucca or @nhussein11 can help?

    Make sure you have libp2p port `30333` activated. It will take some time to discover other peers over the network.

## Bond DOT

Once your validator node is synced, the next step is bonding DOT. A bonded account, or stash, holds your staked tokens (DOT) that back your validator node. Bonding your DOT means locking it for a period, during which it cannot be transferred or spent but is used to secure your validator's role in the network. The following sections will guide you through bonding DOT for your validator.

### Minimum Bond Requirement

Before bonding DOT, ensure you meet the minimum bond requirement to start a validator instance. The minimum bond is the least DOT you need to stake to enter the validator set. To become eligible for rewards, your validator node needs to be nominated by enough staked tokens.

For example, on May 21st, 2024, the minimum stake backing a validator in Polkadot's era 1449 was 2,377,756.492 DOT. You can check the current minimum stake required using these tools:

- [**Subscan**](https://polkadot.subscan.io/validator_list?status=validator){target=\_blank}
- [**Staking Dashboard**](https://staking.polkadot.cloud/#/overview){target=\_blank}

> ### Bonding DOT on Polkadot.js Apps

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure about this one, but I think this should be `Polkadot.Js App`

<!--TODO: this section needs refactored. I visited the site and could not follow these instructions at all. The referenced images do not exist in our repo, etc.-->

Once you're ready to bond your DOT, follow these steps using the Polkadot.js Apps UI:

1. Go to the Network drop down at the top of the page, select the arrow to expand, and then select [Staking](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/staking/actions) section. Click on "Account Actions", and then the "+ Stash" button.

![bonding-JS-UI](../assets/JS-UI-bond.webp)

- **Stash account** - Select your Stash account (which is the account with the DOT/KSM balance)
- **Value bonded** - How much DOT from the Stash account you want to bond/stake. Note that you do
  not need to bond all of the DOT in that account. Also note that you can always bond _more_ DOT
  later. However, _withdrawing_ any bonded amount requires the duration of the unbonding period. On
  Kusama, the unbonding period is 7 days. On Polkadot, the planned unbonding period is 28 days.

> - **Payment destination** - The account where the rewards from validating are sent. More info

Reviewer 2: broken link

After a few seconds, you should see an `ExtrinsicSuccess` message.

Your bonded account will be available under `Stashes`. You should now see a new card with all your
accounts (note: you may need to refresh the screen). The bonded amount on the right corresponds to
the funds bonded by the Stash account.

<!--end of needed refactor by content/tech team-->

## Set Session Keys

Setting up your validator's session keys is essential to associate your node with your stash account on the Polkadot network. Validators use session keys to participate in the consensus process. Your validator can only perform its role in the network by properly setting session keys which consist of several key pairs for different parts of the protocol (e.g., GRANDPA, BABE). These keys must be registered on-chain and associated with your validator node to ensure it can participate in validating blocks. 

The following sections will cover generating session keys, submitting key data on-chain, and verifying that session keys are correctly set. 

### Generate Session Keys

The Polkadot.js Apps UI and the CLI are the two primary methods used to generate session keys.

=== "Use Polkadot.js Apps UI"

>     1. Ensure that you are connected to your validator node through the PolkadotJS-Apps interface

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. Ensure that you are connected to your validator node through the Polkadot.Js Apps interface
```
